Integrated Sensor
Suite Installation Manual




For Vantage Pro2™ & Vantage Pro2 Plus™ Weather Stations




Davis Instruments, 3465 Diablo Avenue, Hayward, CA 94545 • 510-732-9229 • www.davisnet.com
Contents
Introduction ....................................................................................................... 1
Included Components and Hardware ................................................................ 1
Cabled ISS Assembly ........................................................................................ 7
Wireless ISS Assembly ..................................................................................... 9
Preparing the ISS for Installation .................................................................... 13
Installing the ISS ............................................................................................. 19
Installation Instructions ................................................................................... 20
Maintenance and Troubleshooting .................................................................. 25
     Appendices ............................................................................................... 28




    FCC Part 15 Class B Registration Warning
    This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a Class B digital device, pursuant to Part 15
    of the FCC Rules. These limits are designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful interference in a res-
    idential installation. This equipment generates, uses, and can radiate radio frequency energy and, if not installed
    and used in accordance with the instructions, may cause harmful interference to radio communications.
    However, there is no guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular installation. If this equipment does
    cause harmful interference to radio or television reception, which can be determined by turning the equipment on
    and off, the user is encouraged to try to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures:
    •       Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
    •       Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver.
    •       Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to which the receiver is connected.
    •       Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help.
    Changes or modification not expressly approved in writing by Davis Instruments may void the warranty and void
    the user's authority to operate this equipment.
    FCC ID: IR2DWW6328
    IC: 378810-6328
    EC EMC Compliance
    This product complies with the essential protection requirements of the EC EMC Directive 89/336/EC.



    Integrated Sensor Suite Installation Manual
    Rev. C, September 14, 2006
    Document Part Number: 07395.249
    For Vantage Pro2 Weather Stations # 6322, 6322C, 6323, 6327, 6327C, 6328
    Vantage Pro® and Vantage Pro2™ are trademarks of Davis Instruments Corp., Hayward, CA.
    © Davis Instruments Corp. 2006. All rights reserved.
    Information in this document subject to change without notice.




                             3465 Diablo Avenue, Hayward, CA 94545-2778 U.S.A.
                                        510-732-9229 • Fax: 510-732-9188
                               E-mail: info@davisnet.com • www.davisnet.com
Introduction
  The Integrated Sensor Suite (ISS) collects outside weather data and sends the data to a
  Vantage Pro2 console or Weather Envoy. Wireless and cabled versions of the ISS are
  available, as well as standard and plus versions. The Wireless ISS is solar powered and
  sends data to the console via a low-power radio. The Cabled ISS sends data and receives
  power via the console cable.
  The standard version of the ISS contains a rain collector, temperature sensor, humidity
  sensor and anemometer. In addition to the standard weather features, the ISS Plus adds a
  pre-installed solar radiation sensor and an ultra-violet (UV) radiation sensor. Temperature
  and humidity sensors are mounted in a passive radiation shield to minimize the impact of
  solar radiation on sensor readings. The anemometer measures wind speed and direction
  and can be installed adjacent to the ISS or apart from it. See “Locating the ISS and
  Anemometer” on page 15 for siting guidelines.
  On an ISS Plus, the additional solar and UV sensors are mounted next to the rain
  collector cone. Solar and UV sensors are available separately to upgrade a standard ISS.
  The Sensor Interface Module (SIM) contains the “brains” of the ISS and the radio
  transmitter. The SIM is located on the front of the radiation shield in the SIM box. The
  SIM collects outside weather data from the ISS sensors and then transmits the data to
  your Vantage Pro2 console or Weather Envoy.

Included Components and Hardware
  The ISS comes with all the components and hardware shown in the following
  illustrations. If you purchased your ISS as part of a weather station package containing
  the Vantage Pro2 console, additional components may be included in the package that are
  not shown here.
  Components
                                        Debris Screen
                                        (place inside cone
                                        after installation)
                       Rain Collector                  UV and Solar
                                                       Sensors
                                                       (ISS Plus Only)                      Anemometer
                                                                                               Vane
                                                       Sensor
                                                       Mounting Shelf
         Solar Panel                                   (ISS Plus Only)
          (wireless                                                                                Control
          ISS only)                                                                                 Head

                                                                                                    Drip
             SIM                                                                                    Ring
           Housing


                                                   ISS Base                                     Wind Cups
                                                                             Anemometer
                                                                                Arm
              Radiation
               Shield
                                                                         Anemometer Cable
                                                                            40' (12.2 m)


                                                                                             Anemometer
                                                                                                Base
            Metric Rain Adapter         Console Cable 100' (30 m)
                                           (Cabled ISS Only)



                                                                                                             1
Preparing the ISS for Installation


Note:       If the ISS is a Plus model and contains UV and solar sensors, do not touch the small white diffusers
            on top of the sensors. Oil from skin reduces their sensitivity. If you are concerned that you have
            touched the diffusers at any time during the installation, clean the UV diffuser using ethyl alcohol
            with a soft cloth. When cleaning the UV diffuser, DO NOT use rubbing or denatured alcohols
            because they can affect accuracy of the sensor readings. Ethyl alcohol can be procured through an
            industrial or laboratory supply store. Clean the solar diffuser with a soft damp cloth.

        Hardware
        The following hardware is included with the ISS and weather station assembly. Some of
        the hardware is optional based on how the ISS is assembled and installed. (See “Installing
        the ISS” on page 19 for more information.)




                    U-Bolts




                                                                               1/4" x 3" Lag Screws
           1/4" Flat Washers

          1/4" Lock Washers                                                  #4 x 1-1/8"
                                                                            Machine Screw
               1/4" Hex Nuts                                                   #4 Tooth                 3-Volt
                                                                             Lock Washer              Lithium
             Backing Plate                              .05" Allen                                     Battery
                                                                             #4-40 Hex Nut
                                                           Wrench                                     (wireless
                                                                                                       models
                                                                                                         only)
                  8" Cable Tie

Note:       If any of the hardware components are missing or not included, contact Customer Service toll free
            at 1-800-678-3669 about receiving replacement hardware or other components.

        Tools for Setup
        The following are additional tools required to set up and install the ISS:
          • Small Phillips head screwdriver
          • Scissors or wire-cutters
          • Adjustable wrench or 7/16" wrench
          • Compass or local area map
          • Ballpoint pen or paper clip (or other small pointed object)
          • Drill and 3/16" (5 mm) drill bit (if mounting on a vertical surface)

Preparing the ISS for Installation
        Please follow the steps in the order they are presented. Each step builds on tasks
        completed in previous steps.
Note:       Using a well-lit work table or work area to prepare the ISS for installation is recommended.




2
                                                       Preparing the ISS for Installation


The steps to prepare the ISS for installation are:
  • Assemble the anemometer.
  • Check the factory-installed sensor cable connections to the SIM.
  • Connect the anemometer sensor cable to the SIM.
  • Apply power to the ISS and test communication with the console.
  • Change the Transmitter ID for wireless communication, if necessary.
Assemble the Anemometer
The anemometer measures wind direction and speed. The anemometer arm comes
partially assembled with the wind vane attached. The anemometer arm requires assembly
before it can be assembled with the rest of the ISS.
Please locate the following parts to prepare the anemometer:
   • Anemometer arm (wind vane and cable already attached)
   • Anemometer base
   • Wind cups
   • Drip ring
   • Allen wrench (0.05")
   • #4 machine screw, #4 tooth-lock washer, #4 hex nut
Attaching Anemometer Arm to Base
1. Insert the anemometer arm into the base, sliding the cable through the notch in the
   base as shown in illustration.
2. Be sure to line up the small hole in the arm with the holes in the base.
3. Insert the machine screw through the holes in the base and arm.




                                 Insert
                            anemomter arm
                               into base

                                                          #4 Tooth
                                                        Lock Washer
                                                   Hex Nut
                   Slide cable
                 through notch

                                                                         #4 x 1-1/8"
                                                                          Machine
                                                                           Screw




                                                                      Important:
                                                                      Press cable
                                                                      firmly
                                                                      into channel



                                                                                            3
Check SIM Sensor Connections

        4. Slide the tooth-lock washer and hex nut onto the machine screw. Tighten the hex nut
           while holding the screw with a Phillips head screwdriver to prevent it from turning.
        5. Press the sensor cable firmly and completely into the zig-zagging channel in the base,
           starting from the arm and progressing downward to the bottom of the base. Be sure to
           press the cable into the channel at the bottom of the groove.
Note:       The pole can pinch or cause wear on the anemometer cable if the cable is not pressed completely
            into the channel at the bottom of the groove.

        Attaching the Drip Ring and Wind Cups
        The drip ring attaches to the bottom edge of the anemometer head. It assists in preventing
        ice from immobilizing the wind cups.
        1. Place the black plastic drip ring on the bottom edge of the anemometer head. Gently
           push the drip ring onto the head until it clicks into place.
        2. Make sure the lower edge of the drip ring is aligned with the lower edge of the ane-
           mometer head.




                       Anemometer
                          Head

                                Drip Ring

                                                                 Lower edge of drip ring aligned
                                                                 with lower edge of anemometer head

                                               Attaching the Drip Ring

        3. Push the wind cups up onto the anemometer’s stainless steel shaft.
        4. Slide the wind cups up the shaft as far as possible.
        5. Use the Allen wrench provided to
           tighten the set screw on the side
           of the wind cups.
           The wind cups should drop              Push cups onto
                                                  stainless steel
           slightly when you let go.              shaft
        6. Spin the wind cups.                                               Tighten set
           If the wind cups spin freely, the                                 screw with
                                                                             Allen wrench
           anemometer is ready and can be                Attaching Wind Cups
           set aside while you prepare the
           rest of the ISS for installation.
Note:       If the wind cups don’t spin freely, take them off and repeat the wind cup installation process.


Check SIM Sensor Connections
        The SIM is located in the housing on the front of the ISS station. The SIM contains all the
        connections for the weather sensors of the ISS. Check the SIM to ensure that all sensors
        are connected properly.

4
                                                                     Check SIM Sensor Connections


        Open the SIM Box
        1. Locate the white box with the solar panel
           containing the SIM on the front of the
           ISS unit. The cabled model does not have
           a solar panel.
        2. Locate the white tab at the bottom center
           of the SIM box cover.
        3. Lift the tab away from the box while slid-
           ing the cover up.
           Look on the side of the SIM box. The
           box cover can be easily removed from
           the box when the alignment indicator on
           the cover is lined up with the alignment
           indicator on the box
        4. Lift the cover off the box, being careful
           not to stress the solar panel cable.
           The SIM and sensor connectors are
           visible once the SIM cover has been
           removed.

Note:         See “SIM Board Display and Contents” on page 30 for information on locating the components
              and points of interest on the SIM board.

        Optional: Disconnect the solar panel
        connection
        The solar panel on the box cover is
        connected to the SIM by a wire. If the
        cover cannot be set aside while still
        connected to the SIM box safely, it
        should be disconnected from the SIM
        box. To disconnect the solar power
        connection:
        1. Locate the brown connector for the
           solar power wire.
        2. Pull the connector outward off the
           brown solar power tab. The solar
           panel is no longer connected to the
           SIM.
        3. Set the SIM cover aside.
        Check the Factory Installed Sensor Connections
        1. Verify that the rain collector and temperature/humidity sensor cables are plugged into
           the receptacles labeled RAIN and TEMP/HUM on the SIM.
        2. If the station includes UV and/or solar radiation sensors, verify that the sensor cables
           are plugged into the receptacles labeled UV and SUN on the SIM.



                                                                                                           5
Check SIM Sensor Connections

        Connect the Anemometer Cable to the SIM
        1. Unwind the coil of cable enough to work with the anemometer. Do not unwind the
           entire coil of anemometer cable at this time.
        2. Pull the foam insert out of
           cable access port in
           between the cables and set
           the foam insert aside.
        3. Insert the anemometer
           cable end into the cable                                                 Sensor
                                                                                   Interface
           access port from beneath                                                 Module
                                                                                     (SIM)
           the SIM box.
           Slide the cable through the
           cable access port with the
           connector lever down.
        4. Firmly insert the end of the
           anemometer cable into the
           connector labeled WIND.
           The lever clicks into place.                                                      Foam
                                                                                             Insert
        5. Make sure that the cables
           lie flat on the bottom the
           cable access port.
        6. Firmly insert the foam in
           between the cables and at
           the top of the cable access                Note: Only Plus models have UV and
           port, taking care to ensure                   solar cables already attached
           that the foam seals the
           access port entirely, leaving
           no holes or gaps large enough for weather or insects.
Note:       If you are assembling a cabled station, wait to reinsert the foam until cable assembly is complete.
            See “Cabled ISS Assembly” on page 7.

           Once the sensor connections have been checked and the anemometer cable has been
           inserted, a connection between the ISS and the Vantage Pro2 console must be made.
        7. Read the following instructions that best apply to your ISS and Vantage Pro2 assem-
           bly:
           • See “Cabled ISS Assembly” on page 7 for assembling Vantage Pro2 weather sta-
              tions that contain a cabled connection between the ISS and the console.
           • See “Wireless ISS Assembly” on page 9 for assembling Vantage Pro2 weather sta-
              tions that use a wireless connection to transmit and receive data.




6
Cabled ISS Assembly
   The Cabled ISS system contains a cable for connecting the ISS to a Vantage Pro2 cabled
   console. Once the anemometer has been installed and the sensors have been checked, a
   cabled connection between the ISS and the console can be established. Follow the steps
   below for powering the ISS and connecting to the console.
Applying Power
   The 100' (30 m) console cable provides power to the ISS and is used to send data from
   the ISS to the console. The console cable can be extended up to 1000' (305 m) in length
   with extension cables purchased from Davis Instruments.
   1. Locate the 100’ console cable included with your system.
   2. Pull the foam insert out of cable access port, if it has been reinserted, and set the foam
      aside.
   3. Insert the console connector cable end into the cable access port from beneath the SIM
      box. Slide the cable through the cable access port with the connector tab down.
   4. On the SIM, firmly insert one end of the 4-con-
      ductor cable into the modular connector located                                From Cabled
      apart from the sensor connectors next to the bat-                              Vantage Pro 2
                                                                                       Console
      tery insert. This connector is labeled CONSOLE.
      If you haven’t powered up the console yet, refer to         Sensor
                                                                 Interface
      the installation instructions in the Vantage Pro2           Module
                                                                   (SIM)
      Console Manual and apply power to the console.
   5. On the back of your console, insert the other end of the console cable into the modular
      receptacle labeled “ISS”.
   6. Firmly insert the foam in between the cables and at the top of the cable access port,
      taking care to ensure that the foam seals the access port entirely, leaving no holes or
      gaps for weather or insects. See the graphic on page 6 for more information on insert-
      ing the foam insert.
      Plugging the console cable into the console powers the ISS and establishes communi-
      cation between the ISS and the console. The ISS should immediately begin collecting
      weather data and start sending the data to the console.
Verifying Communication with the Console
   Use these steps to verify reception of ISS data at the Cabled Vantage Pro2 console and to
   test the operation of the ISS sensors.
   1. If the console is in Setup Mode, press and hold DONE until the Current Weather
      screen displays.
      Sensor readings from the ISS should display on the screen.
   2. Near the center of the screen, look for the outside temperature.
   3. Spin the wind cups to check wind speed, pressing WIND if necessary to alternate
      between speed and direction in the compass rose.
   4. Turn the wind vane, and allow 5 seconds for the wind direction display to stabilize
      before moving it again.



                                                                                              7
Troubleshooting Cabled ISS Communication

           Approximately one minute after power-up the outside relative humidity reading
           should be displayed on the console.
        5. If the ISS contains a UV sensor and/or solar sensor, press 2ND and then press RAIN
           YR for current ultraviolet readings or press 2ND then press RAIN DAY for solar radi-
           ation readings.
           The UV reading displays in the center of the console. The solar reading displays in the
           bottom right corner of the console display. UV and solar readings should be zero or
           close to zero if the ISS is inside. Zero is a valid reading. Dashes(--) are displayed if no
           data comes from the sensors.
        6. Current weather data displayed on the console confirms communication.
           Once the ISS has been powered and the console has successfully received accurate
           readings from all the sensors, prepare the ISS for installation. Continue on to
           “Preparing the ISS for Installation” on page 13 for more information.
           If the communication problems still exist between the cabled ISS and the console, see
           “Troubleshooting Cabled ISS Communication” below.
           To ease the installation process of ISS at a location, disconnect the console cable from
           the SIM. Remove the foam and slide the cable out through access port. Once a loca-
           tion for both the ISS and the console has been arranged, reinsert the cable through the
           access port, into the console connector, and reinsert the foam.

Troubleshooting Cabled ISS Communication
        If the console is not receiving sensor readings from the ISS, please try the following
        troubleshooting procedures.
            • Check the console to make sure it is being powered with the AC adapter supplied in
               the Vantage Pro2 packaged box or three C batteries.
Note:       The supplied adapter is a five-volt positive center AC to DC adapter. Other adapters may not work if
            the voltage or adapter type is different.

           • Make sure the cable is firmly plugged into the ISS connector on the console.
           • Make sure that the console cable is firmly plugged into the correct connector
             on the SIM.
           • Verify that all sensor cables are firmly plugged in.
           • An LED indicator light on the SIM flashes each time the ISS transmits, which is
             about once every 2.5 seconds. If the LED remains dark, there is a problem with the
             ISS transmitter. Call Technical Support. See “Contacting Davis Instruments” on
             page 27.
        See “SIM Board Display and Contents” on page 30 for information on locating the LED
        indicator light and the DIP switches.
Note:       If the LED is flashing rapidly, call Technical Support. See “Contacting Davis Instruments” on
            page 27 for more information.

        If the console is still not receiving readings, ensure that the console is in Setup Mode and
        reboot the console by disconnecting the AC power adapter from the console and
        removing the console batteries for at least 30 seconds. If the console is still not displaying
        sensor readings from the ISS, please contact Davis Technical Support.


8
 Wireless ISS Assembly
        The ISS has a wireless connection to a Vantage Pro2 wireless console. Once the
        anemometer has been installed and the sensors have been checked, the ISS must be
        powered and a wireless communication channel must be established between the ISS and
        the console. Follow the steps below for powering the ISS and establishing a connection to
        the console.
           • Applying Power to a Wireless ISS
           • Verifying Communications with the Console
           • Verifying Data from the ISS Sensors
           • Troubleshooting ISS Reception

Applying Power to a Wireless ISS
        1. Insert the 3-volt lithium battery into the SIM.
           Once powered, the ISS immediately begins transmitting data to the console.
           Be sure to match the “+” sign on the battery with the “+” sign on the SIM. See “SIM
           Board Display and Contents” on page 30.
           The SIM stores energy from the solar panel for power at night. The battery is an alter-
           native power source the SIM uses when it is depleted of energy.

Checking Transmitter ID
        A Vantage Pro2 console can receive data from up
                                                                      ON
                                                                                           Settings for Transmitter ID 1:
        to eight different wireless stations. The default                                       DIP Switch 1 = OFF
        Transmitter ID for the ISS and console is 1.                                            DIP Switch 2 = OFF
                                                                           1   2   3   4
                                                                                                DIP Switch 3 = OFF
        In most cases it will not be necessary to change
        the Transmitter ID. The console and ISS should
        begin communicating automatically when power is applied.
Note:       If it is necessary to change the Transmitter ID, remember to use the same ID for the ISS and con-
            sole. See “SIM Board Display and Contents” on page 30 for locating the components and points of
            interest on the SIM board.


Verifying Communication with the Console
        1. Power the console if it does not already have power. Refer to the Vantage Pro2
           Console Manual and apply power the console.
           The console automatically enters Setup Mode when powered up.
        2. If the console is not in Setup Mode, press and hold DONE then press the down arrow.
           The message RECEIVING FROM... and STATION NO. followed by the Transmitter
           IDs that the console detects displays on the console screen.
        3. Look for the ISS Transmitter ID. The number 1 displays unless the Transmitter ID has
           been changed. If the console displays the ISS Transmitter ID, the ISS is detected.
Note:       If the console does not display the number of the ISS Transmitter ID setting, see “Troubleshooting
            Wireless ISS Reception” on page 10 for more information. It can take several minutes for the con-
            sole to acquire and display all the available Transmitter IDs.

        4. Press and hold DONE to view ISS data once the ISS Transmitter ID displays.

                                                                                                                    9
Verifying Data from the ISS Sensors


Verifying Data from the ISS Sensors
     Use these steps to verify reception of ISS data at the wireless Vantage Pro2 console and to
     test the operation of the ISS sensors.
     1. Press and hold DONE until the Current Weather screen displays, if the console is in
        Setup Mode.
        Sensor readings from the ISS should display on the screen.
     2. Near the center of the screen, look for the outside temperature.
     3. Spin the wind cups to check wind speed, pressing WIND if necessary to alternate
        between speed and direction in the compass rose.
     4. Turn the wind vane, and allow 5 seconds for the wind direction display to stabilize
        before moving it again.
        Approximately one minute after power-up the outside relative humidity reading
        should be displayed on the console.
     5. If the ISS contains a UV sensor and/or solar sensor, press 2ND and then press RAIN
        YR for current ultraviolet readings or press 2ND then press RAIN DAY for solar
        radiation readings.
        The UV reading displays in the center of the console. The solar reading displays in the
        bottom right corner of the console display. UV and solar readings should be zero or
        close to zero if the ISS is inside. Zero is a valid reading — dashes are displayed if no
        data comes from the sensors.
     6. Current weather data displayed on the console confirms successful communication.
     Once the ISS has been powered and the console has successfully received accurate
     readings from all the sensors, prepare the ISS for installation. Continue on to “Preparing
     the ISS for Installation” on page 13 for more information.
     If the communication problems still exist between the wireless ISS and the console, see
     “Troubleshooting Wireless ISS Reception.”

Troubleshooting Wireless ISS Reception
     If the console isn’t displaying data from the ISS, perform the following steps:
     1. Verify that the console is powered and is not in Setup Mode.
     2. Make sure that all ISS sensor cables are firmly connected to the SIM and the ISS bat-
         tery is properly installed.
     3. Walk around the room with the console, standing for a few moments in various loca-
         tions, to see if you are picking up signals from the ISS. Look on the screen’s lower
         right corner. An “X” toggles on and off when the console receives a transmission.
     4. If you do not see the “X” slowly blinking, no matter where you stand with the console,
         put your ISS in Test Mode.
         • The DIP switch #4 on the SIM is the Test Mode
                                                                                 Setting for Test Mode
            switch. Switch it to the ON position, using a ball-     ON
                                                                                 DIP Switch #4 = ON
            point pen or paper clip.
                                                                       1 2 3 4
         • An LED indicator light on the SIM flashes each
            time the ISS transmits, which is about once every
            2.5 seconds.


10
                                                                  Troubleshooting Wireless ISS Reception


Note:       If the LED is flashing rapidly, call Technical Support. See “Contacting Davis Instruments” on
            page 27 for more information.

           See “SIM Board Display and Contents” on page 30 for information on locating the
           components and points of interest on the SIM board.
        5. If the LED remains dark, there is a problem with the ISS transmitter. Call Technical
           Support. See “Contacting Davis Instruments” on page 27.
        6. If the LED flashes repeatedly but your console isn’t picking up a signal anywhere in
           the room, it could be related to one of the following causes:
           • You changed the ISS Transmitter ID at the ISS or console, but not at both.
           • Reception is being disrupted by frequency interference from outside sources.
               Interference has to be strong to prevent the console from receiving a signal while in
               the same room as the ISS. In high-interference environments, it may be preferable
               to install the Cabled Vantage Pro2.
           • There is a problem with the console.
        7. If a problem with receiving the wireless transmission still exists, please contact Tech-
           nical Support. See “Contacting Davis Instruments” on page 27.
        8. When you are finished testing wireless transmission, set DIP switch # 4 to OFF to take
           the SIM out of Test Mode.
Note:       If the SIM is left in Test Mode, the blinking LED will significantly reduce ISS battery life.

        Optional: Changing ISS Transmitter ID
        Each wireless transmitting station, including the Integrated Sensor Suite (ISS), uses one
        of eight selectable Transmitter IDs. DIP switches #1, 2 and 3 on the transmitter control
        the ID — or channel — the station transmits on. DIP switch #4 is used for transmission
        testing, not for Transmitter ID.
Note:       The transmitter on the ISS and receiver on the console communicate with each other only when
            both are set to the same ID.

        The default Transmitter ID is 1 for both the ISS and the Vantage Pro2 console, and should
        work fine for most situations. Change the Transmitter ID if any of the following issues
        are true:
        • Another Davis Instruments wireless weather station operating nearby already uses
            Transmitter ID 1.
        • Additional wireless transmitting stations have been purchased with the Vantage Pro2
            or Vantage Pro2 Plus and one of the stations has been designated as Station No. 1
            instead of the selected ISS.
            On the ISS, the Transmitter ID is set using the DIP switches located on the Sensor
            Interface Module (SIM). To access the SIM, open the SIM housing cover. See “Open
            the SIM Box” on page 5.




                                                                                                            11
Troubleshooting Wireless ISS Reception




                                                            ON



                                                                 1   2    3    4




                                                                                       DIP Switches


                              Transmitter ID DIP Switches in Top-right Corner of SIM
        To change to another ID, use a ballpoint pen or paper clip to toggle DIP switches #1, 2,
        and 3. The settings for Transmitter IDs 1 - 8 are shown in the table on the next page.
        Set the Vantage Pro2 console to the same ID as the transmitters, as described in the
        Vantage Pro2 Console Manual.

                         ID CODE            SWITCH 1             SWITCH 2                 SWITCH 3

                       #1 (default)             off                      off                   off

                            #2                  off                      off                   ON

                            #3                  off                      ON                    off

                            #4                  off                      ON                    ON

                            #5                 ON                        off                   off

                            #6                 ON                        off                   ON

                            #7                 ON                        ON                    off

                            #8                 ON                        ON                    ON

     Using Multiple Transmitting Stations
     This table shows the maximum number of each type of station that can be used with a
     single Vantage Pro2 console.
                                         Station Type                              Maximum Number
                                 Integrated Sensor Suite (ISS)                           1
                                 Anemometer Transmitter Kit*                             1
                          Leaf & Soil Moisture/Temperature Station                       2**
                                      Temperature Station                                8
                                Temperature/Humidity Station                             8
                                           *Replaces the ISS anemometer.
         **Two are allowable only if both stations are only partially populated. For example, A network can either
        have both a Leaf Wetness/Temperature station and a Soil Moisture/Temperature station, or it can have one
                            combined Leaf Wetness and Soil Moisture/Temperature station.




12
Preparing the ISS for Installation
        Once all the sensors have been connected and communication between the ISS and the
        console has been successfully established, continue to prepare the ISS unit for
        installation. The steps for preparing the ISS for installation are as follows.
        • Close the SIM Box
        • Prepare the Solar Panel
        • Prepare the Rain Collector
        • Site the ISS and Anemometer
Close the SIM Box
        To close the SIM box and continue assembling the ISS:
        1. If the solar panel wire was disconnected during ISS assembly, reconnect the wire on
           the SIM box cover to the solar panel tab on the SIM board.
Note:       See “SIM Board Display and Contents” on page 30 for information on locating the solar panel tab.

        2. Look on the side of the SIM box. Match up the box cover alignment indicator with the
           alignment indicator on the SIM box and place the cover against the box.
        3. Slide the cover down until it snaps securely in place.
Prepare the Rain Collector
        The tipping bucket is secured at the factory to protect it from
        damage during shipping. To use the ISS properly, the bucket must be
        released. To release the bucket:
        1. Remove the rain collector cone from the ISS base by rotating the
           cone counter-clockwise. When the cone’s latches line up with
           openings in the base, lift the cone off the ISS base.
           When new, the cone fits tightly in the base and may require extra
           pressure to remove. Steady the ISS base between your knees
           when removing the cone.                                                          Twist to Open
        2. Carefully cut and remove the
           plastic tie (usually black in color)                     Tipping Bucket
           that holds the tipping bucket in
           place during shipping.
        3. On your console screen, look for
           the DAILY RAIN display.
           If the console is cabled to the ISS,
           reconnect the cable and see if the
           console is receiving rain readings.



                                                                      Cut the
                                                                     plastic tie




                                                                                                        13
Prepare the Rain Collector

     4. While watching the daily rain display, slowly tip the bucket until it drops to the
        opposite side. Each tip indicates 0.01" of rain and may take up to a minute to register
        at the console. If the bucket is tipped too quickly, the number on the console display
        may not change. Tip the bucket slowly when testing the rain collector.
     5. Temporarily reinstall the rain collector cone until you are ready to mount the ISS
        outside. If you are installing the metric measurement adapter, do not reinstall the rain
        collector cone.
     Optional: Insert the Metric Measurement Adapter
     The rain collector tipping bucket mechanism contains a standard measurement weight
     magnet that takes measurements in 0.01''. The ISS hardware kit contains a metric adapter
     that adjusts the weight of the tipping bucket mechanism so that it reports 0.2 mm metric
     measurements for every tip of the bucket. To install the metric adapter:
     1. Find the metric adapter included in the hardware.
     2. Locate the magnet between the arms of the bucket.
     3. Open the arms slightly with one hand while pulling the magnet out with the other.




                         Open plastic tipping mechanism arms, pull out magnet
     4. Separate an end cap from one end of the magnet.




                                  Separate magnet from one end cap
                   Insert magnet with other end cap into metric measurement adapter




14
                                                                       Locating the ISS and Anemometer


        5. Slide the magnet, exposed end of magnet first, into the open slot of the metric adapter.
        6. Insert the metric adapter and magnet between the arms of the bucket, with the solid
           side of the metric adapter facing up.




                             Open plastic arms to insert metric measurement adapter,
                                           with adapter in “V” position

Note:       The above procedure converts the collector to 0.2 mm measurements. The console must be set
            accordingly. See the Vantage Pro2 Console Manual for more information.


Locating the ISS and Anemometer
        For the weather station to perform at its best, use these guidelines to select the optimum
        mounting locations for the ISS and anemometer. Be sure to take into consideration ease
        of access for maintenance, sensor cable lengths and wireless transmission range when
        siting the station.
Note:       When selecting a location for installing your ISS, especially on a rooftop, make sure it is a location
            far from power lines. Seek professional help if you uncertain about the safety of your installation.


        General ISS Siting Guidelines
        • Place the ISS away from sources of heat such as chimneys, heaters, air conditioners
          and exhaust vents.
        • Place the ISS at least 100' (30 m) away from any asphalt or concrete roadway that
          readily absorbs and radiates heat in the sun. Avoid installations near fences or sides of
          buildings that receive a lot of sun during the day.
        • Ideally, place the radiation shield of the ISS 5' (1.5 m) above the ground in the middle
          of gently sloping or flat, regularly mowed grassy or naturally landscaped area that
          drains well when it rains. For areas with average maximum yearly snow depths over 3'
          (0.9 m), mount the ISS 2' (0.6 m) above this depth.
        • Never install the ISS where it will be directly sprayed by a sprinkler system because it
          will adversely affect the readings.
        • Avoid installations near bodies of water such as swimming pools or ponds.
        • Do not locate the ISS under tree canopies or near the side of buildings that create “rain
          shadows”. For heavily forested areas, site the ISS in a clearing or meadow.
        • Site the ISS in a location with good sun exposure throughout the day if the ISS is wire-
          less or includes solar radiation or UV radiation sensors.

                                                                                                                15
Locating the ISS and Anemometer

          For agricultural applications (Important for evapotranspiration (ET) calculations):
          • Install the ISS and anemometer as a single unit with the radiation shield 5'
            (1.5 m) above the ground and in the middle of the farm between similar crop types
            (i.e. two orchards, two vineyards or two row crops), if possible.
          • Avoid areas exposed to extensive or frequent applications of agricultural chemicals
            (which can degrade the sensors).
          • Avoid installation over bare soils. The ET formula works best when the ISS is
            installed over well-irrigated, regularly mowed grass.
          • If the last three guidelines cannot be met, install the weather station at the edge of
            the primary crop of interest.
        Anemometer Siting Guidelines
        • For best results, place the anemometer at least 7' (2.1 m) above surrounding obstruc-
          tions such as trees or buildings that obstruct wind flow.
        • If mounting on a roof, mount the anemometer at least 7' (2.1 m) above the roof apex
          (when using a Mounting Tripod, install the anemometer at the very top of the pole).
        • The standard for meteorological and aviation applications is to place the anemometer
          33' (10 m) above the ground. Seek professional help for this type of installation.
        • The standard for agricultural applications is to place the anemometer 6' (2 m) above
          the ground. This is important for evapotranspiration (ET) calculations.
Note:      For roof mounting, and ease of installation, we recommend using the optional mounting Tripod
           (#7716). For other installations, use the Mounting Pole Kit (#7717).

        Optional: Anemometer Cable Length Considerations
        • All Vantage Pro2 stations
          include a 40' (12 m) cable to go
          between the ISS and the ane-
          mometer. This can be extended
          up to 540' (165 m) using optional
          extension cables purchased from
          Davis Instruments.                                                                    Anemometer
                                                                                                Cable
        • If most of the anemometer cable
          length is unused, the coiled cable
          length can be stowed once the
          anemometer and ISS have been
          installed on a site. Attaching the
          anemometer cable to the mount-                                                        Cable Tie

          ing pole using the supplied cable
          tie is the recommended option.
          Keep the anemometer cable
          coiled if possible during the ISS
          and anemometer assembly so
          that it is easily stowed once
          installation is complete.
        • The Cabled Vantage Pro2 includes a 100' (30 m) cable to go between the console and
          the ISS. This can be extended up to 1000' (300 m) using optional cables.

16
                                                                  Locating the ISS and Anemometer


Optional: Wireless Transmission Considerations
The range of the radio transmission depends on several factors. Try to position the
transmitter and the receiver as close as possible for best results.
Typical maximum ranges include:
• Line of sight: 1000 feet (300 m).
• Under most conditions: 200 - 400 feet (60 - 120 m).
Other range and transmission considerations include:
• Range may be reduced by walls, ceilings, trees, foliage, a metal roof or other large
  metal structures or objects such as aluminum siding, metal ducts, and metal
  appliances, such as refrigerators, televisions, heaters, or air conditioners.
• Frequency interferers also reduce transmission distance. Cordless phones (900 Mhz)
  are a common example of frequency interference.
• Transmission between wireless units may be obscured by something unidentifiable, or
  by some obstacle that can’t be worked around.
• For best results, orient the ISS antenna and the console antenna so that the orientation
  and angles of the antennas are parallel to each other.



                                                        If your ISS is directly overhead,
                                                        the orientation illustrated


                                   (( (                 here might work best.
                                                                        (( (

                  For best reception, orient antennas
                  so they are parallel to each other.



• If possible, align the pivot joints of both the ISS and the console antennas so that they
  are facing each other for maximum signal strength.
• Turn the gain on to improve reception of a weak signal. Refer to the Vantage Pro2
  Console Manual for information on setting the console gain.
• For better reception over greater distances or for weaker signals, consider using a
  Wireless Repeater (#7626 or #7627) or Long-Range Wireless Repeater (#7653 or
  #7654) to strengthen the signal or increase the distance between your ISS
  and the console.




                                                                                                17
Locating the ISS and Anemometer


        Testing Wireless Transmission at ISS Location
        After a suitable place has been found for the wireless ISS, it is very important to test
        reception from the installation location before permanently mounting it there.
        1. Set the ISS in the desired installation location.
        2. Set the console in the desired location.
        3. Press and hold TEMP and press HUM to display statistical and reception diagnostics
           on the console.
           • It’s a good idea to test the console’s reception anywhere that you might want to use
              or mount it now or in the future. Take your time. If you aren’t picking up a strong
              signal where you intend to place your console, try rotating the antenna on the con-
              sole and ISS or try moving the console and ISS to different positions.
           • Irregular terrain in the area may interfere with the signal. For example, if the ISS is
              mounted downhill from the console, the ground may block a large percentage of
              the transmitted signal.
        4. Press and hold DONE to return to the normal screen when finished testing.
Note:       See the Troubleshooting section of the Vantage Pro2 Console Manual for information on how to
            check wireless signal strength and for more information on troubleshooting reception problems.




18
Installing the ISS
        The anemometer and the main part of the ISS can be installed either together as a single
        unit on a pole, or apart from each other. The main part of the ISS includes the rain
        collector, the temperature and humidity sensors, the radiation shield, and the SIM
        housing. Use the U-bolts to install the ISS and anemometer together or separately on a
        pole. Use the lag screws to install them separately on a flat, vertical surface.
        The anemometer comes with a 40' (12 m) cable for flexibility in configuring the system
        to monitor wind conditions. For example, the anemometer could be mounted at the
        highest point of a roof, and the ISS could be mounted on a fence closer to ground level.
General ISS Installation Guidelines
        •  Install the ISS as level as possible to ensure accurate rain measurements. Use a bub-
           ble level or carpenter’s level to make sure the ISS is level.
        • In the Northern Hemisphere, the solar panel should face south for maximum sun
           exposure.
        • In the Southern Hemisphere, the solar panel should face north for maximum sun
           exposure. Either install the ISS and anemometer separately, each facing north, or
           mount them as a single unit with solar panel facing north and the wind vane re-ori-
           ented to the South. See “Appendix A: Re-orienting the Wind Vane” on page 28.
        Optional: Guidelines for Securing Cables
        • To prevent fraying or cutting of cables, secure them so
           they will not whip about in the wind.
        • Secure cable to a metal pole using cable ties or by wrap-
           ping tape around both the cables and the pole.                               Cable Tie
                                                                             Cable Clip
        • Place clips or ties approximately every 3' – 5' (1 – 1.6 m).
        • Mounting clips, cable ties or additional hardware not included with your station can
           be easily obtained at a hardware or electronics store.

Note:         Do not use metal staples or a staple gun to secure cables. Metal staples — especially when
              installed with a staple gun — have a tendency to cut the cables.

        Orient the Wind Vane
        The wind vane rotates 360° to display current and dominant wind directions on the
        compass rose of the console display. To obtain accurate readings, the vane must be
        correctly oriented when mounting the anemometer outside. By default, the wind vane
        reports the correct wind direction if the anemometer arm points true north.
        To ensure correct orientation of the wind vane, do one of the following:
        1. Mount the anemometer so that the arm points true north.
           The wind vane will be ready for use immediately.
        2. If the anemometer is mounted so that it does not aim true north, remove the wind vane
           and re-attach it aiming toward the preferred direction. Refer to the instructions in
           “Appendix A: Re-orienting the Wind Vane” on page 28.




                                                                                                       19
Installing the ISS on a Flat Surface


Installation Instructions
        There are several ways to mount and install the ISS unit. The following are installation
        types that Davis Instruments recommends. Individual ISS locations and installations may
        vary.
           • Installing the ISS on a flat surface
           • Installing the Anemometer on a post or flat surface
           • Installing the ISS on a pole
Note:       All installations require that the rain collector cone be removed for assembly.


Installing the ISS on a Flat Surface
        Refer to the following illustration to install the ISS on a post or flat, vertical surface.




                                                                                  1/4" Flat Washers
                                          Anemometer Base                              1/4" Lock Washers

                                                                                                  1/4" x 3" Lag Screws


                               Backing Plate
                           1/4" x 3"
                          Lag Screws




                                                                     40’ of Anemometer Cable


                                                                            Note: Typically the anemometer and rain
                                                                            collector are mounted on opposite sides
                                                                            of the post. They are shown mounted on
                                                                            adjoining sides to clarify the installation
                                                                            details.




        Option 1: Installing the ISS on a Post or Flat Surface
        1. With a 3/16" (5 mm) drill bit, drill two holes approximately 2-1/8" (54 mm) apart. Use
           a carpenter’s level to ensure the holes are level.
           Use the metal backing plate as a guide when marking the holes.
        2. Remove the rain collector cone if it is installed on the ISS mounting base.
        3. Insert the 1/4" x 3" lag screws through the metal backing plate and the holes in the
           mounting base into the post.
        4. Tighten the lag screws using an adjustable wrench or 7/16" wrench.
        5. Re-attach the rain collector cone. Set the cone back on the base so its latches slide
           downward into the latch openings on the base. Rotate cone clockwise.
        6. Place the debris screen (shown in the illustration on page 1) inside the cone, “feet-
           down” over the funnel hole.


20
                                                                      Installing the ISS on a Pole


   Option 2: Installing the Anemometer on a Post or Flat Surface
   1. With a 3/16" (5 mm) drill bit, drill two holes approximately 2-1/8" (54 mm) apart. Use
      a carpenter’s level to ensure the holes will be level.
   2. Insert the 1/4" x 3" lag screws through the flat washers and the holes in the anemome-
      ter mounting base into the post.
   3. Tighten the lag screws using an adjustable wrench or 7/16" wrench.
      If the anemometer arm is not pointing north, follow the instructions in “Appendix A:
      Re-orienting the Wind Vane” on page 28.

Installing the ISS on a Pole
   When installing the ISS on a pole, the rain collector and radiation shield section of the
   ISS can be mounted as a single unit with the anemometer section, or the two sections can
   be mounted separately.
   Refer to the following illustration when installing the ISS or anemometer on a pole.


                              1/4" Hex Nut
                                  1/4" Lock Washer
                                       Nut Plate

                                                                                         1/4" Flat Washer
                                                                                              1/4" Lock Washer
                                                                                                    1/4" Hex Nut




                                                            U-Bolts




                                                   Rain Collector
                                                   Mounting Base
                                                                          Anemometer
                                                                         Mounting Base




   Accessories for Pole Mounting
      • Use the Mounting Tripod (#7716) for easy roof-mounting.
      • Use the Mounting Pole Kit (#7717) to raise the installation height of the ISS by up
        to 37.5" (0.95 m).
   General Guidelines for Installing on a Pole
      • With the supplied U-bolts, the ISS can be mounted on a pole having an outside
        diameter ranging from 1-1/4" to 1-3/4" (32 – 44mm).
      • Larger U-bolts (not supplied) can be used to mount to a pole with a maximum out-
        side diameter of 2-1/2" (64mm).
      • To mount on a smaller pole, obtain a U-bolt that fits the base openings but that has
        a shorter threaded section. If mounting the ISS on a smaller pole with the included
        U-bolts, the bolt interferes with the rain collector cone.



                                                                                                            21
Installing the ISS on a Pole

        Guidelines for Installing the ISS on a Pole
          • When mounting both sides together, remember that whichever side of the ISS is
             mounted first, the U-bolt from the opposite side must also be placed around the
             pole before tightening the U-bolts. (If it is not, there is no way to slide it in later.)
          • In each side’s mounting base, there is a groove to accommodate the other’s U-bolt.
          • Once the two sides of the ISS have been loosely mounted together on the pole,
             swivel the unit to the correct direction and then tighten the hex nuts. The desired
             height can also be achieved by sliding the ISS vertically.
        Option 1: Installing ISS and Anemometer Together
        Try to install the ISS so the anemometer arm is aiming north. If the arm doesn’t point
        north, re-orient the wind vane. See “Appendix A: Re-orienting the Wind Vane” on
        page 28.
        1. Place the U-bolt for the anemometer around the pole so that its round end fits in the
           top groove of the side of the rain collector side’s plastic mounting base. The groove is
           right above two large holes.
        2. While holding the mounting base of the rain collector against the pole, place the two
           ends of the remaining U-bolt around the pole and through the two holes in the base.
        3. Slide the metal backing plate over the bolt ends as they stick out over the rain collector
           base. Secure the backing plate with a lock washer and hex nut on each of the bolt ends
           as shown previously.
Note:       Do not tighten the hex nuts yet. Leave the hex nuts loose to swivel the ISS base on the pole.

        4. The two ends of the anemometer’s U-bolt should now be pointing away from the
           mounted rain collector side. Slide the anemometer’s mounting base over the protrud-
           ing bolt ends. Place a flat washer, a lock washer and a hex nut on each of the bolt ends
           as shown above. Do not tighten the nuts yet.
        5. Raise the ISS unit to the desired height on the pole and swivel it so the anemometer
           arm is pointing north.
        6. Using an adjustable wrench or 7/16" wrench, tighten all four hex nuts until the ISS is
           firmly fastened on the pole.
        7. Re-attach the rain collector cone by setting the cone back on the base so its latches
           slide downward into the latch openings on the base, then rotate the cone clockwise.
        8. Place the debris screen (shown in the illustration on page 1) inside the cone, “feet-
           down,” over the funnel hole. When installing the ISS as a single unit, we recommend
           tucking the coil of anemometer cable between the rain collector cone and the ISS base.
        Option 2: Installing ISS Only
        1. While holding the mounting base against the pole, place the two ends of a U-bolt
           around the pole and through the two holes in the base.
        2. Slide the metal backing plate over the bolt ends as they stick out toward the rain col-
           lector cone. Secure the backing plate with a washer, a lock washer, and a hex nut on
           each of the bolt ends. Do not tighten the nuts yet.
           For the wireless ISS, swivel the ISS base so the solar panel is facing south (in the
           Northern Hemisphere), or north (in the Southern Hemisphere).




22
                                                                                  Finishing the Installation


        3. Tighten the hex nuts using an adjustable wrench or 7/16" wrench.
        4. Re-attach the rain collector cone.
           Set the cone back on the base so its latches slide downward into the latch openings on
           the base. Rotate the cone clockwise.
        5. Place the debris screen (shown in the illustration on page 1) inside the cone, “feet-
           down,” over the funnel hole.
        Option 3: Installing Anemometer Only
        1. While holding the mounting base against the pole, place a U-bolt around the pole and
           through the two holes in the base.
        2. Place a flat washer, a lock washer and a hex nut on each of the bolt ends.
        3. Swivel the anemometer until the arm is pointing north.
           If the anemometer arm is not pointing north, go to “Appendix A: Re-orienting the
           Wind Vane” on page 28 after tightening the hex nuts.
        4. Using an adjustable wrench or 7/16" wrench, tighten the hex nuts.

Finishing the Installation
        Level the Solar and UV Sensors
        If you have a Vantage Pro2 Plus station that includes a solar or UV sensor, use the bubble
        level on the sensors as a guide to verify that the sensors are level.
        Adjust the level by tightening or loosening the screws that hold the sensor onto the shelf.
Note:       If you are installing the solar or UV sensors separately, see the Sensor Mounting Shelf installation
            manual and the Solar Radiation and UV Sensor Installation manuals for more information.

        Clearing Data Collected During Testing and Installation
        Now that the ISS is mounted outside, any data that was collected in the Vantage Pro2
        console during testing and mounting can be cleared.
        To clear all the collected data on the console:
        1. Press WIND so that graph icon appears adjacent to the wind data on the display.
        2. Press 2ND, then press and hold CLEAR for at least six seconds and until you see
           “CLEARING NOW” in the console ticker display.

Additional Mounting Options
        Extending Wireless Transmission Range
        Optional repeater stations can be used to extend the wireless transmission range.
          • Wireless Repeater, AC-Powered (#7626)
          • Wireless Repeater, Solar-Powered (#7627)
          • Long-Range Wireless Repeater, AC-Powered (#7653)
          • Long-Range Wireless Repeater, Solar-Powered (#7654)
        Extending the Console Cable (Cabled ISS Only)
        A Cabled ISS can be extended up to 1000' (300 m) away from the console by using Davis
        Instruments extension cables (#7876).



                                                                                                            23
Additional Mounting Options

        Relocating the Anemometer
        Using Extension Cables:
Note:       Not all cables are compatible with your Vantage Pro2 system. To be sure they will work, order Davis
            extension cables from your dealer or directly from Davis Instruments.

        The Anemometer can be extended further than 40' from the ISS by using Davis
        Instruments extension cables (#7876).
        Be aware that the maximum measurable wind speed reading decreases as the total length
        of cable from the anemometer to the ISS increases.
Note:       If the cable length is greater than 540' (165m), the maximum measurable wind speed may be less
            than 100 MPH (161 km/h).

        Using the Anemometer Transmitter Kit (Wireless ISS Only)
        Use the Anemometer Transmitter Kit (#6332) to add an independent wireless transmitter
        to the anemometer. The kit allows the anemometer to function as a transmitter station
        sending wind data directly to the console, instead of transmitting via the ISS.
        Remote Mounting the Solar and UV Sensors
        The solar and UV sensors have a 3' (0.9 m) cable. If you wish to install these sensors away
        from the ISS, you can extend the length of the sensor cables up to 125' (38 m) with Davis
        Instruments extension cables (#7876).
        Optional Wireless Stations
        You may use our optional wireless sensor stations to collect weather measurements,
        without the inconvenience of routing cables.
           • Wireless Temperature Station (#6372)
           • Wireless Temperature/Humidity Station (#6382)
           • Wireless Leaf & Soil Moisture/Temperature Station (#6345)
        For more details, please visit our website or see the most recent Davis Precision Weather
        Instruments catalog.




24
Maintenance and Troubleshooting
        Maintaining UV and Solar Radiation Sensors
        If the ISS is a Plus model and contains UV and solar sensors, do not touch the small white
        diffusers on top of the sensors. Oil from skin reduces their sensitivity. If you are con-
        cerned that you have touched the diffusers at any time, clean the UV diffuser using ethyl
        alcohol with a soft cloth. When cleaning the UV diffuser, DO NOT use rubbing or dena-
        tured alcohols because they can affect accuracy of the sensor readings. Ethyl alcohol can
        be procured through an industrial or laboratory supply store. Clean the solar diffuser with
        a soft damp cloth.
        Due to the sensitivity of ultraviolet and solar radiation sensors it is common practice for
        manufacturers to recommend re-calibration after a period of time. Users demanding high
        accuracy typically recalibrate their sensors annually. Here at Davis Instruments, we have
        seen less than 2% drift per year on the readings from these sensors.
        Contact Technical Support about returning your sensor for calibration. See “Contacting
        Davis Instruments” on page 27.
        Cleaning the Radiation Shield
        The outer plating of the radiation shield should be cleaned when there is excessive dirt
        and build-up on the plating. Use a damp cloth to clean the outer edge of each ring.
Note:       Spraying down or using water excessively to clean the radiation shield can damage the sensitive
            sensors or alter the data and readings the ISS is transmitting.

        Check the radiation shield for debris or insect nests at least
        once a year and clean when necessary. A buildup of material                        4" Bolt


        inside the shield reduces its effectiveness and may cause                           Lock
                                                                                           Washer
                                                                                            Flat

        inaccurate temperature and humidity readings.                                      Washer




        To thoroughly clean the radiation shield
                                                                                                     Rain Collector Base
        1. Remove the rain collector cone.
        2. Using a Phillips head screwdriver, loosen the three 4''                Plates


           (~100mm) bolts holding the radiation shield plates
           together.
        3. Separate the plates as shown and remove all debris from
           inside the shield.
        4. Reassemble the radiation shield plates and fasten them
           together using the bolts as shown in the illustration. Use a
           Phillips head screwdriver to tighten the bolts.                                           Temp/Humidity
                                                                                                     Sensor

        Cleaning the Rain Collector
        To maintain accuracy, thoroughly clean the rain collector
        several times a year.

Note:       Cleaning the rain collector and tipping buckets my cause false rain readings. Unplug the RAIN sen-
            sor from the SIM before cleaning so that no inaccurate readings are logged, or clear the weather
            data that was logged on the Vantage Pro2 console after cleaning is complete. See your Vantage
            Pro2 Console Manual for instructions on clearing weather data.



                                                                                                              25
Troubleshooting

        1. Separate the cone from the base by turning it counter-clockwise.
        2. Use soapy water and a soft cloth to remove any debris from the cone, cone screen, and
           tipping bucket.
        3. Use pipe cleaners to clear the funnel hole in the cone and drain screens in the base.
        4. When all parts are clean, rinse with clear water.
        5. Re-attach the cone and replace the debris screen.

Troubleshooting
        If a Sensor Functions Intermittently
        Carefully check all connections from the sensor to the ISS. See “Check SIM Sensor
        Connections” on page 4.
        Loose connections account for a large portion of potential problems. Connections should
        be firmly seated in receptacles and plugged in straight. To check for a faulty connection,
        try jiggling the cable while looking at the display. If a reading displays intermittently on
        the console as the cable is jiggled, the connection is faulty. Try removing and then re-
        installing the cable to correct the faulty connection. If the sensor still functions intermit-
        tently contact Technical Support. See “Contacting Davis Instruments” on page 27.
        Most Common Rain Collector Problem
        If the rain collector seems to be under-reporting rainfall, remove the rain collector cone to
        clean the tipping bucket and clear out any debris. Make sure the cable tie around the
        tipping bucket has been cut and removed.
        Most Common Anemometer Problems
        “The anemometer head is tilted when I mount the anemometer.”
             With Allen wrench provided in the supplied hardware, loosen the screws holding
             the anemometer head on the arm. (The screws are on the bottom of the anemometer
             head, by the wind cups.) Turn the anemometer head so it is straight and then tighten
             the screws.
        “The wind cups are spinning but my console displays 0 mph.”
              The signal from the wind cups may not be making it back to the display. Remove
              the cups from the anemometer (loosen the set screw). Put the cups back onto the
              shaft and adjust them up or down 1/16 – 1/8 inch (1.5 – 3 mm). Check your cables
              for visible nicks and cuts. Look for corrosion in the WIND connector on the SIM
              and on splices in the cable. If using an extension cable, remove it and test using
              only the anemometer cable. Contact Technical Support and ask for a wind test
              cable if the problem has not been resolved.
Note:       If the anemometer is sending no data, the wind display indicates 0 speed and a North direction.

        “The wind direction is stuck on north, or displays dashes.”
              It is likely that there is a short somewhere between the wind vane and the display.
              Check the cables for visible nicks and cuts. Look for corrosion in the “WIND” jack
              on the SIM and on splices in the cable (if any). If possible, remove any extensions
              and try it with the anemometer cable only. If none of these steps get the wind
              direction working, contact Technical Support and ask for a wind test cable.



26
                                                                                                Troubleshooting


        “The wind cups don’t spin or don’t spin as fast as they should.”
              First check for and clear out any spider webs. Also, the anemometer may be located
              where wind is blocked by something, or there may be friction interfering with the
              cups’ rotation. Remove the wind cups (loosen the set screw) and clear out any bugs
              or debris. Turn the shaft the cups rotate on. If it feels gritty or stiff, contact Davis
              Technical Support.
Note:       Do not lubricate the shaft or bearings in any way. When replacing the cups, make sure they are not
            rubbing against any part of the anemometer head.

        “Readings aren’t what I expected them to be.”
              Comparing data from your ISS to measurements from TV, radio, newspapers, or a
              neighbor is NOT a valid method of verifying your readings. Readings can vary
              considerably over short distances. How you site the ISS and anemometer can also
              make a big difference. If you have questions, contact Technical Support.
        Contacting Davis Instruments
        If you have questions about the ISS or Vantage Pro2 system, or encounter problems
        installing or operating the weather station, please contact Davis Technical Support.
Note:       Please do not return items to the factory for repair without prior authorization.

        (510) 732-7814 – Technical Support phone, Monday – Friday, 7:00 a.m. – 5:30 p.m.
        Pacific Time.
        (510) 670-0589 – Technical Support Fax.

        support@davisnet.com – E-mail to Technical Support.

        info@davisnet.com – General e-mail.

        www.davisnet.com – Download manuals and specifications from the Support section.
        Watch for FAQs and other updates. Subscribe to the e-newsletter.




                                                                                                              27
Appendices
Appendix A: Re-orienting the Wind Vane
            The Vantage Pro2 station is configured to register wind direction correctly if the
            anemometer points to true north. If the anemometer shaft cannot be mounted to
            point to true north, use the following instructions to correct the wind vane
            orientation.
        •   Do not rely on a compass unless it is properly calibrated. In North America there
            can be up to 15° variation between true north and a raw compass reading.
        •   Correct the wind direction readings by calibrating the wind direction in the Van-
            tage Pro2 console. See the Vantage Pro2 Console Manual for information.
        •   To orient the wind vane accurately, look at the console display. Have another per-
            son watch the console display while orienting the wind vane.
        •   Also, re-orient the wind vane before the anemometer is installed if the direction
            in which the anemometer will be installed is already known.
     To re-orient the wind vane:
     1. Loosen the wind vane set screw.
     2. Pull the vane directly up and off the steel shaft on
        which it turns.
     3. Press WIND on the console to display current wind
        direction in degrees.
     4. Use a reliable map, properly calibrated compass or a
        landmark to determine which direction is true south.
     5. Slowly turn the stainless-steel wind direction shaft              Wind Direction Chart
        with your fingers. Stop turning when the display
        reaches 180° obtained in step 3.
     6. Allow the wind direction display approximately 5 seconds to stabilize after the shaft
        is turned. Turn the shaft, wait, and turn it again until 180° is displayed on the con-
        sole.
     7. Being careful to keep the stainless-steel shaft from turning, place the wind vane on
        top of shaft with the vane’s nose pointing south.
     8. Slide the wind vane down the shaft as far as it will go.
     9. Use the Allen wrench provided to tighten the set screw on the side of the wind vane.
     10.Test the anemometer by pointing the wind vane in any direction and making sure the
        console displays the correct wind direction. Remove and re-adjust the vane if it does
        not. Allow the wind direction display approximately 5 seconds to stabilize after
        turning the shaft.




28
                                                                                     Appendix B: Specifications




                                                                                     Tighten set screw
                                                                                     with Allen wrench




                                        Installing Wind Vane on Anemometer Shaft

     11. Test the anemometer by pointing the wind vane in any direction and making
         sure the console displays the correct wind direction. Remove and re-adjust the
         vane if it does not. Allow the wind direction display approximately 5 seconds
         to stabilize after turning the shaft.
Appendix B: Specifications
     Complete specifications for the ISS and other products are available in the Weather
     Support section of our website at www.davisnet.com.
     Cabled ISS
     Temperature range: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -40 to 150° Fahrenheit (-40 to 65° Celsius)
     Power input: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Console Cable from Vantage Pro2 console Optional
                                                            Vantage Pro2 AC power adapter
     Wireless ISS
     Temperature range: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -40 to 150° Fahrenheit (-40 to 65° Celsius)
     Transmission frequency: . . . . . . . . . . . . 902 - 928 MHz FHSS for North America
                                                                868.0 -868.6 MHz FHSS for overseas versions: EU, UK,
                                                                and OV
     Transmitter ID codes: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 user-selectable
     License: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . low power (less than 8 mW), no license required
     Primary power: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Solar power – Davis solar charger
     Backup power: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . CR-123A 3-volt lithium battery (8 months without sun-
                                                                light- greater than 2 years depending on solar charging)
     Alternate power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . AC power adapter
     ISS Weather Variable Update Intervals
     (Transmitter ID Dependent)
     Wind speed: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.5 to 3 seconds
     Wind direction: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.5 to 3 seconds
     Accumulated rainfall: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 to 12 seconds
     Rain rate: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 to 12 seconds
     Outside temperature: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 to 12 seconds
     Outside humidity: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 seconds to 1 minute
     Ultraviolet radiation: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 seconds to 1 minute
     Solar radiation: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 seconds to 1 minute




                                                                                                                    29
SIM Board Display and Contents


SIM Board Display and Contents
                          1             2          3     4




                                                             5


              + -
                                                             6

                                                             7




                                  SENSOR
                                  INTERFACE
                                  MODULE


                                            TEMP
      UV     SUN       RAIN      WIND
                                             HUM




     12       11        10        9          8


 1    Solar Power Tab                   7    Test LED

 2    AC Adapter Socket                 8    Temperature/Humidity Sensor Connector

 3    Battery Socket                    9    Wind Sensor Connector

 4    Cabled Connection                 10 Rain Sensor Connector
 5    Transmitter ID DIP Switch         11 Solar Radiation Sensor Connector

 6    Test DIP Switch                 12 UV Sensor Connector


30
